---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: We Can Be Better
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2020-12-18
labels:
  - Coding Standards
  - Functional Programming
  - Ethics
  - Software Engineering
---

I’m sure most of us have experienced or currently experience some level of imposter syndrome; I certainly do. But up until I took a software engineering course, that feeling immense and heavy. Sure, I learned how to code in a few different languages and studied algorithms till my brain nearly imploded, but I was always unsure of how it would make me a great software engineer in the future. Would I be able to effectively function in a typical professional setting? It was overwhelming because there were many concepts I couldn’t grasp and I felt like I was learning a lot but at the same time, not. Through my software engineering course, I absorbed a lot of valuable knowledge that I believe prepared me a bit more for the real world, and has made me more confident that computer science is the most suitable field for me. Some of my key takeaways from this course include the benefits of functional programming, coding standards and ethics.  

Functional programming in JavaScript was a new concept to me because I was only familiar with object-oriented programming with languages like Java and C++. It has a pretty big learning curve and took a little time to wrap my head around the idea that functions could be passed as arguments or return values from other functions. However, I think the rewards of understanding functional programming are also pretty great. It became so much easier to understand and apply because for one, it eliminated the need to use loops for iteration. A ‘for’ or ‘while’ loop that would normally occupy many lines of code takes just a few lines to solve the same problem. This also leads to another great benefit: easy to understand code, which also means easier debugging.  And I believe functional programming for software engineers is very valuable and worth the learning curve because of this. Knowing how to code well is great and can get you very far as a software engineer, but effective collaborative work is absolutely vital in this field. During Fall of 2020, I was able to experience what it was like to develop a web application collaboratively and remotely for an ICS 314 course. Honestly, the thought of it was a little overwhelming because it was my first time working on a project of this size and difficulty in a team. Approximately three weeks into the project, I realized how easy it was to understand my team members’ code. This surprised me because I’ve reviewed code in other classes previously, and I dreaded it because sometimes it wasn’t easy to follow along code that you haven’t written yourself. It was difficult to pinpoint exactly what certain code was doing and how it could improve, which brings me to my next point of the importance of coding standards for software engineers, and its advantages for effective workflow.  

Coding standards is essential in software engineering because it optimizes efficiency and reduces complexity, especially in collaborative work.  A well-defined coding environment allows ease of reading and debugging code. My first time learning about and exercising coding standards was also in my ICS 314 course, where we worked with ESLint in IntelliJ. Like with everything else, the most difficult part was getting used to it because if some code did not follow ESLint’s standards, it would give you an annoying red squiggly line, like it does in a Word document if there are spelling or grammatical errors. And let me tell you, annoying is an understatement for my feelings towards those ugly squiggly lines. However, I realized that it quickly benefitted my efficiency in coding JavaScript. I acquired a better habit of writing code and soon, there were fewer and fewer errors. This, alongside the benefits of functional programming bettered the workflow of collaborative work for the project I worked on. Without coding standards such as ESLint, reviewing and understand my team members’ code would have expended too much time.

Aside from the more technical elements of being a great software engineer, ethics play a crucial part as well. As developers, we are a part of a significant and influential force that is driving society. Advanced technology is making its way into every aspect of our everyday lives exponentially and we need to be conscious of our practices. We need to exercise our power and knowledge to shape a healthier culture that revolves around technology. Collectively, we have the ability to change the world, to develop such advanced software and technology we never would have thought was possible, but how we apply it ethically is what needs to be discussed more. Are you comfortable working for a company that stores and sells users’ data without their knowledge? Are you content with developing a social platform that distributes fabricated or hateful information to the world? Who are held responsible for these technologies that harms society? We are. We can do better. 



